# 0: Introduction

This pamphlet is addressed at folks who know Lojban. They've read not just a
tutorial like [la
karda](http://ldlework.com/projects/cards/la-karda/index.html), the [Crash
Course](https://mw.lojban.org/papri/The_Crash_Course_in_Lojban), or the [Wave
Lessons](https://mw.lojban.org/papri/Lojban_Wave_Lessons), but also
[CLL](https://lojban.org/publications/cll/cll_v1.1_xhtml-section-chunks/) and
the [BPFK Sections](https://mw.lojban.org/papri/Category:BPFK_Section), and
some of the various notes from many community members.

I am not aiming to teach the syntax of Lojban, but to radically and
fundamentally approach the logical foundations of the semantics of Lojban. We
will not start with pronouns, but with relations, and we will always keep the
mathematics in mind as we progress.

A common theme in the Lojban community is an uncertainty about what words
mean. Since words are treacherous and don't have ultimate meaning, and many
Lojbanists are philosophers, it is predictably common for such uncertainty to
evolve into passionate discussion featuring these themes:

* "Lojban is not a
  [relex](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Conlang/Types#Relexes)": Aside from
  Lojban itself being forked from Loglan, Lojban is not merely a borrowing of
  semantics precisely established and defined in some natural language.
* Limited words can still blanket semantic space by being vague. We can use
  tanru to carefully describe observed objects in only certain ways, without
  committing to imprecision or incorrectness.
* The [grue/bleen
  problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_riddle_of_induction#Grue_and_bleen)
  prevents us from fixing any absolute meaning to any word over time.

So, rather than give each word a meaning on its own, I will use categorical
logic and reasoning to build up structural meanings for Lojban. The resulting
interpretation will have the structure of an
[allegory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allegory_(mathematics)), indeed a
[bicategory of
relations](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/bicategory+of+relations), but do not
let these currently-unfamiliar mathematical terms worry you, as they are both
just ways to talk about what relations are.
