# Discursive Logic

On top of the formal ingredients, we should imagine that most conversational
Lojban takes place in a discursive modal logic, not **Loj** or **Selb**. This
is where words like {lo} and {le} can be properly defined. Consider:

    lo mlatu ku mlatu

This *bridi* does not have explicit quantifiers. Whether it is true depends on
which universe of discourse we use to interpret it. For example, the empty
universe should, in some sense, *not* satisfy it, because {lo mlatu} should
refer to something *which the speaker doesn't have in mind yet* but which
still exists. The act of clarifying referents leads to argument over [the
contents of the universe of
discourse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain_of_discourse), and so deserves
its own treatment apart from mathematics and hard sciences.

## Restrictive and non-restrictive clauses

It's not clear what the difference between {noi} and {poi} is, but it is a
discursive difference: there is no change in logical content, but something is
denoted to listeners.

## Modals

Historically assigning any semantics to {fau} is difficult; what is the
difference between this utterance:

    broda fau lo nu brode

And this utterance:

    broda .i lo nu brode ku fasnu

We cannot rely upon any open *sumtcita* to help, since {fasnu} is unary.
Perhaps there is a discursive difference; perhaps the former utterance also
implies some connection or relevance between the two *bridi*. To be clear, the
latter utterance also has an implied connection, the "story-time convention",
as manipulated with {ki}.

## Signs: sinxa, la'e, lu'e, lu'i

As in CLL, we can define `{la'e}` and `{lu'e}` as shorthand for `{sinxa}`.
Note that symbols and interpretations are things, and thus are subject to
quantification.

    ro da poi sinxa ke'a zo'u:

    lo sinxa be da ku broda de
    ========================== (lu'e-intel) [CLL 6.10]
      lu'e da lu'u broda de

    ro da poi ke'a sinxa zo'u:

    lo se sinxa be da ku broda de
    ============================= (la'e-intel) [CLL 6.10]
        la'e da lu'u broda de

I recall discussion about whether sinxa3 is implicitly `{mi}` or `{mi'a}` or
some similar connection to the speaker. However, I am not sure whether this is
a cultural convention, and at any rate, leaving `sinxa3` unbound allows for more
flexible usage.

Additionally, `{lu'i}` and `{lu'a}` can be defined as `{lo'i}`-like expansions
of `{sinxa}` which include a set quantification. These definitions are only
hinted at in CLL, and were explored by la xorxes.

    ro da zo'u:

    lo sinxa be lo cmima be da ku broda
    =================================== (lu'a-intel)
               lu'a da broda

    lo sinxa be lo se cmima be da ku broda
    ====================================== (lu'i-intel)
                lu'i da broda

## Ellipsis: zo'e, co'e, do'e

An ellipsis represents a *selbri* or *terbri* which the speaker has not yet
uttered. As such, they should be registered as discursive evidence, rather than
given semantics like `{zi'o}`.
