# Introduction to Logic

In our daily lives, we are often told to be logical. However, it is rare for
us to be told what logic is. As a result, many of us stumble through life with
a vague sense of syllogism without formality.

## Syllogisms

A syllogism ([WP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syllogism),
[nLab](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/syllogism)) is a foundational form of
deductive proof. It operates according to the following schema:

1. If *P*, then *Q*.
1. If *Q*, then *S*.
1. Therefore: If *P*, then *S*.

Here *P*, *Q*, and *S* are statements made out of words. This is the first
principle of logic: we are oriented around words and rules which manipulate
them, not the meanings of the words. As logicians, we recognize that natural
usage of language does not always respect logical rules, which means that we
cannot let *P*, *Q*, or *S* be arbitrary statements; instead, they must be
constructed according to logical rules. We will revisit this later, but first
let us consider syllogisms in Lojban, which have the following schema:

1. {ganai *broda* gi *brode*}
1. {ganai *brode* gi *brodi*}
1. Therefore: {ganai *broda* gi *brodi*}

For now, the logical rules are easy to state: *broda*, *brode*, and *brodi*
must be grammatical bridi with valsi drawn from a basis set. The basis set
contains valsi like {ganai} and {gi} which are necessary to state the logical
rules themselves; if we didn't choose a basis, then we wouldn't be able to
define our logic! However, the basis set will not contain
[discursive connectives](0-midju/discursive.md), so it may seem like a
restricted way of using Lojban at first. We will see later how to define new
valsi in terms of the basis set.

## *modus ponens*

*Modus ponens* ([WP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modus_ponens),
[nLab](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/modus+ponens)) is the most common name
for the following schema:

1. Suppose: *P*.
1. If *P*, then *Q*.
1. Therefore: *Q*.

To be direct with the reader: "*modus ponens*" or "MP" is one of those few
names that you must memorize; it occurs too frequently and is too fundamental
to not be known. I apologize and wish it had a better common name.

In Lojban, there are several schema we might consider. Here is one classic
schema:

1. Suppose: {*broda*}
1. {lo du'u *broda* cu nibli lo du'u *brode*}
1. Therefore: {*brode*}

We will eventually build variations on this, but it turns out to be untenable
for deep reasons. Instead, the schema used throughout la brismu is:

1. Suppose: {*broda*}
1. {ganai *broda* gi *brode*}
1. Therefore: {*brode*}

This schema is compatible with the syllogism schema. Both schemata have a
bridi of the form {ganai *broda* gi *brode*}. Considering this more deeply
leads to…

## Categorical logic

Categorical logic ([WP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Categorical_logic),
[nLab](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/categorical+semantics)) is a way of
studying logic by studying the properties of structures generated by systems
with *modus ponens*, like the "if"/"then" of English or {ganai}/{gi} of
Lojban. This lets us study the ontology of a logic (what a logic can
construct) without doing metaphysics (what a logic thinks is real.)

To gently introduce the concept, we can arrange our structure as a graph. For
here, a graph is

* a set of abstract objects, known as vertices, along with
* a set of connectors between objects, known as edges, such that
* each edge connects from one vertex to another vertex, and
* every vertex has an edge which connects it to itself.

Assign a vertex to each bridi. A path in a graph is a sequence of edges with
each edge following the other. In our running example, a path from {*broda*}
to {*brodi*} might consist of two edges, one from {*broda*} to {*brode*} and
another from {*brode*} to {*brodi*}. We'll let {ganai *broda* gi *brode*}
represent a path from the {*broda*} vertex to the {*brode*} vertex. An
application of *modus ponens* to a path is merely a traversal along the path.
A syllogism is a composition of paths; path (1) ends where path (2) begins,
constructing path (3).

At this point, the reader is encouraged to let this concept settle.
Categorical logic is important for understanding the overall direction of the
database of theorems, for justifying some of our axioms, and for explaining
the structure of Lojban in a mathematically satisfying fashion. It is *not*
important for understanding individual portions of la brismu or carrying out
the rules of logic. We will merely note that there is a category-theoretic
justification to add {ge} to our basis set.

There are actually two structures worth studying here. One structure uses
{ganai} and the other uses {go}. We may always weaken {go} to {ganai} in
either direction; it is as if the edges of the graph for {go} are undirected,
while the edges of the graph for {ganai} are directed. These structures are
known as [**Loj** and **Core(Loj)**](loj.md) respectively. The main reason to
include {go} is…

## Definitions

We don't want to add every valsi to the basis set. Ideally, we want to define
some valsi in terms of others. Since this effectively extends the basis set
with new valsi, it is known as [extension by
definitions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extension_by_definitions). We will
follow a sort of schema:

1. Suppose: {*broda*}
1. {go *broda* gi *brode*}
1. Therefore: {*brode*}

This is merely *modus ponens* for {go}. However, let us be more specific:

1. Suppose: {*ko'a bu'a*}
1. {go *ko'a bu'a* gi *brode*}
1. Therefore: {*brode*}

Then we might say that the unary selbri {*bu'a*} is defined in terms of
{*brode*}. It is possible (and likely) for {*ko'a*} — which is really just a
placeholder, or metasyntax, for some terbri — to appear in {*brode*}, but not
required. The idea is that we may treat any occurrence of {*bu'a*} as
equivalent to {*brode*} and *vice versa*, so if everything in {*brode*} is
already defined in terms of the basis set, then {*bu'a*} is defined in terms
of the basis set too.

Ironically, we cannot define {go} and {ge} fully in terms of themselves, and
this is the best way to understand why they are in the basis set. However,
once they are established, we can define {ga}, {gonai}, and many selbri.
